Fill a large pot about 2/3 full of water. Since the pasta needs lots of room to move around as it cooks, use a big pot. For example, if you'll be cooking a 1 pound (450 g) box of pasta, get out a pot that's at least 4 US quarts (3.8 L) in size. Then, pour in enough water to come 2/3 up the side of the pot
Cover the pot and bring the water to a boil. Set the pot of water on the stove and put a lid on it. Turn the burner to high and let the water come to a boil. You'll know the water is boiling when you see steam escaping from under the lid
Add salt and 1 pound (450 g) of pasta to the boiling water. Once the water boils vigorously, remove the lid and add 1 tablespoon (17 g) of salt and 1 pound (450 g) of pasta. If you're cooking long noodles, such as spaghetti, that don't fit in the pot, wait about 30 seconds and then push them into the water using a spoon or pasta fork.
Set a timer for 3 to 8 minutes. Stir the noodles with a pasta fork to break the noodles up and leave the lid off the pot. Then, check the pasta package for a recommended cooking time and set a timer for the minimum time that's suggested. For example, if the box says to cook the noodles for 7 to 9 minutes, set a timer for 7 minutes
Stir the noodles occasionally as they boil. The water should continue to bubble as the pasta cooks. Stir it every few minutes to prevent the noodles from sticking together.Bite into a noodle to see if it's cooked enough for you. Carefully scoop a noodle out of the water when the timer beeps and set it aside to cool a little. Bite into the noodle to tell if it's still hard in the center or if it's as soft as you like. Most people prefer to cook pasta until it's al dente, which means it's still a little firm in the center.
Scoop out about 1 cup (240 ml) of pasta water and set it aside. Carefully lower a mug into the pot and scoop some of the pasta water into it. Set the mug aside while you drain the pasta
Set a colander in the sink and put on oven mitts. Place a large colander in the bottom of the sink and wear oven mitts to protect your hands from the boiling water. Even though the burner is turned off, the water can burn you if it splashes your skin.
Pour the pasta into the colander and shake it. Slowly pour the pasta directly into the colander so the water drains into the sink. Hold the sides of the colander and shake it gently back and forth so excess water drips into the sink
Avoid adding oil or running cold water over the pasta if you plan on using sauce. You may have heard people recommend tossing the cooked pasta with some olive oil or running cold water over the noodles to stop them from sticking together. Unfortunately, these can prevent sauce from sticking to your noodles.
Put the pasta back into the pot and toss it with your choice of sauce. Take the colander of pasta out of the sink and transfer the noodles into the pot that you cooked them in. Then, pour in as much of your favorite sauce as you like and use tongs to combine it with the pasta